add update from the polonius wg (#1147)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: posts/inside-rust/2023-09-25-polonius-update.md

        None => {                          // |
            map.insert(key, V::default()); // |
            //  ^~~~~~ ERROR               // |
            map.get_mut(&key).unwrap()     // |
        }                                  // |
    }                                      // |
}                                          // v
```

Returning the mutable reference `value` in the `Some` path requires the mutable loan on `map` to live until the end of the function. This prevents mutation in the `None` path even though no mutable loan on `map` would exist there in the first place. 

Fixing this borrowck issue requires more precision about flow-sensitivity. It also hints at limitations in our modeling of lifetimes, which appear more clearly in cases with only slightly more complicated control flow, like [issue #47680](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/47680):

```rust=
struct Thing;

impl Thing {
    fn maybe_next(&mut self) -> Option<&mut Self> { None }
}

fn main() {
    let mut temp = &mut Thing;

    loop {
        match temp.maybe_next() {
            Some(v) => { temp = v; }
            None => { }
        }
    }
}
```

> Here, the loan created on iteration N _may be used_ in the `None` path on iteration N+1, however the borrowed variable at that iteration is not the same.

Reviewer: how is the loan used in the `None` path? :think

Author: yeah good spot, this actually describes a different minimization of the same issue 

```rust
struct Foo;

impl Foo {
    fn get_self(&mut self) -> Option<&mut Self> {
        Some(self)
    }

    fn bad_method(&mut self) {
        let mut var = self;
        
        loop {
            var = match var.get_self() {
                Some(v) => v,
                None => var
            };
        }
    }
}

fn main() {}
```

It's not the simplest/clearest of the 5 minimizations though, so I'll rewrite the description instead of changing the code example. I likely won't have time to do so until Wednesday/Thursday however.

Author: I tried to describe the cause succinctly, but it ends up less clear and less accurate as a simple soundbite. Niko rewrote it into the few sentences I've pushed in https://github.com/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/pull/1147/commits/ce90cd698a56441486b8cd572ea8550454cd4560. 

It's clearer now, albeit wordy -- which could be fine on Inside Rust, or better suited to a footnote.

@lcnr what do you think?

Issues like "NLL problem case #3", issue #47680 and others, were therefore deferred from NLLs, and left as future work, [Polonius](http://smallcultfollowing.com/babysteps/blog/2018/04/27/an-alias-based-formulation-of-the-borrow-checker/).

The key ideas being:
- switching from a model of _lifetimes_ as sets of points in the CFG (with _outlives_ relationships), to a model of _origins_ as sets of loans (with _subset_ relationships).
- computing and tracking the subset relationships at each point in the Control Flow Graph (whereas the existing borrowck computes a single subtype relation).

## Milestones

This is a rough roadmap, where we have the most visibility on the first steps:
- each step has unknowns that will define what things need to be done in the later steps
- therefore we're talking more about milestones for the longer term roadmap, and proper tasks for the shorter term.

Here are the roadmap's milestones:

> ![Graph of the Polonius roadmap](../../../../images/inside-rust/2023-09-25-polonius-update/roadmap.png)

Reviewer 2: This isn't rendering for me on GitHub. Unsure if this is anticipated (e.g. just a quirk of paths that work on the site but not inline) but wanted to note in case it was typo

Author: I don't believe images can render on github markdown previews because they are collected into a different web root `/static/` and this link pattern is used for resources in Inside Rust. 

Look at e.g. https://github.com/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/pull/1103/files and https://github.com/rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org/blob/92ac9e0679d4f41b338851aab1e18b33071bff9b/posts/inside-rust/2023-05-09-api-token-scopes.md?plain=1#L18 

FWIW the image does show up when locally serving the blog.

### 1. Factoring out higher-ranked concerns from the main path

Today, the trait solver produces higher-ranked outlives constraints and the borrow checker solves them. In the future, we would like to make the [next trait solver](https://github.com/rust-lang/trait-system-refactor-initiative/) responsible for solving these higher-ranked constraints itself, so that it only produces constraints on regions in the root [universe](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/borrow_check/region_inference/placeholders_and_universes.html#what-is-a-universe) (which the borrow checker can easily process). This would allow us to solve implication predicates like `for<T> { if (T: 'a, 'a: 'b) { T: 'b } }` without having to effectively reproduce the same trait solving logic again.

> In the shorter term, we can refactor the borrow checker to separate out the higher-ranked processing from the ordinary processing. The goal would be to preprocess the outlives constraints in a kind of Polonius ["leak check"](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/traits/hrtb.html#basic-matching-and-placeholder-leaks), where we can compute the higher-ranked errors. This can then be removed once the trait solver can solve these constraints.

Reviewer: tbh I am a bit worried that this short term idea may not work out, idk if that means I would like to slightly reword this or just wait until we chat about it (hopefully today) :shrug:

Reviewer 3: Personally, I'd prefer not to wait to discuss -- I think that's putting too much weight into a status update blog post. But we could reword this to like "we are exploring refactoring the borrow checker" or something like that -- and "this could then be removed".

Reviewer: yeah, changing it to "we're looking into refactoring" is also fine :+1: I mostly want to avoid definitive statements while not unsure whether this step is actually feasible

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In the shorter term, we are exploring refactoring the borrow checker to separate out the higher-ranked processing from the ordinary processing. The goal would be to preprocess the outlives constraints in a kind of Polonius ["leak check"](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/traits/hrtb.html#basic-matching-and-placeholder-leaks), where we can compute the higher-ranked errors. This could then be removed once the trait solver can solve these constraints.
```

[`a-mir-formality`]: https://github.com/rust-lang/a-mir-formality

Interestingly, this work is completely independent of rustc, and could in theory be started soon, and done in parallel with the other efforts.

### 7. Location-sensitive pass stable

In this milestone, we expect a lot of work on optimizations, and productization. 

If a similar experience to NLLs in edition 2018 is to be expected again, another substantial amount of work and polish will also be needed to handle diagnostic differences and issues, ensuring errors and notes are clear enough, as well as the documentation.

At this point, the location-sensitive pass is hopefully efficient enough, tested in practice, somewhat formally verified, and can be enabled in edition 2024.

> Around this time, librarification efforts can also be rebooted, to turn the in-tree Polonius into a library, maybe using [Stable MIR][]. This is so that it could be reused elsewhere, for example in [rust-analyzer][], or [gccrs][], or by researchers working on verification tools (like [kani][]), [prusti][] and [creusot][]).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Around this time, librarification efforts can also be rebooted, to turn the in-tree Polonius into a library, maybe using [Stable MIR][]. This is so that it could be reused elsewhere, for example in [rust-analyzer][], or [gccrs][], or by researchers working on verification tools (like [kani][], [prusti][] and [creusot][]).
```

Author: Good catch, thank you.

Issues like "NLL problem case #3", issue #47680 and others, were therefore deferred from NLLs, and left as future work, [Polonius](http://smallcultfollowing.com/babysteps/blog/2018/04/27/an-alias-based-formulation-of-the-borrow-checker/).

The key ideas being:
- switching from a model of _lifetimes_ as sets of points in the CFG (with _outlives_ relationships), to a model of _origins_ as sets of loans (with _subset_ relationships).
- computing and tracking the subset relationships at each point in the Control Flow Graph (whereas the existing borrowck computes a single subtype relation).

## Milestones

This is a rough roadmap, where we have the most visibility on the first steps:
- each step has unknowns that will define what things need to be done in the later steps
- therefore we're talking more about milestones for the longer term roadmap, and proper tasks for the shorter term.

Here are the roadmap's milestones:

![Graph of the Polonius roadmap](../../../../images/inside-rust/2023-09-25-polonius-update/roadmap.png)

### 1. Factoring out higher-ranked concerns from the main path

> Today, the trait solver produces higher-ranked outlives constraints and the borrow checker solves them. In the future, we would like to make the [next trait solver](https://github.com/rust-lang/trait-system-refactor-initiative/) responsible for solving these higher-ranked constraints itself, so that it only produces constraints on regions in the root [universe](https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/borrow_check/region_inference/placeholders_and_universes.html#what-is-a-universe) (which the borrow checker can easily process). This would allow us to solve implication predicates like `for<T> { if (T: 'a, 'a: 'b) { T: 'b } }` without having to effectively reproduce the same trait solving logic again.

Author: I can add that we can find additional details on terminology, on the problem itself, and on this future possible solution involving the trait solver, in this blog spot https://smallcultfollowing.com/babysteps/blog/2019/01/21/hereditary-harrop-region-constraints/.
